release: v0.9.0 (#1009)
rero/rero-ils: RELEASE-NOTES.rst

Release notes
=============

v0.9.0
------

This release note includes the release note of ``rero-ils-ui`` version
``v0.2.0``.

User interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Improves the document detailed views (public and professional) with
   tabs: a “get” tab with the holdings and information on items, a
   “description” tab with extended document metadata and, in the professional
   view, an “online” tab when the resource is available through an hyperlink.
   On top of these tabs are displayed the main metadata of the document with
   the cover thumbnail.

Public interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Removes the item detailed public view which is useless, all relevant

>    information being on the public  document detailed view.

Reviewer: two spaces, all relevant informationS?

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Updates the library custom editor to normalize buttons according to the
   `charter <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/wiki/Usability-charter#buttons>`__.
   Also, when a day is set to closed, the opening hours are hidden in addition
   to being disabled.

Search
~~~~~~

-  Moves from the ES query string, which is powerful but should not be
   used for public search input, to ES simple query, much simpler but much more
   resilient to syntax errors in the query. It also allowed to set the default
   boolean operator to AND, which is what librarians and patrons expect.
   The API requests are still done through the ES query string, as complex
   queries are needed to populate the user interface. A new HTTP query optional
   parameter is added to identify the simple query: ``&simple=1``.
-  Sets the same AND boolean operator instead of OR when selecting
   multiple items in the same facet, thus reducing the scope of the
   filter instead of expanding it.
-  Improves the ES mapping to enhance the search quality.
-  Adds a RERO ILS custom analyzer as the default analyzer.
-  Improves language analyzer with ``unicode`` capabilities (oe, œ, ue, ü,

>    etc.). Uses a new ES docker image with ``icu`` plugins for these

Reviewer: You can add a link to the plugin if you want.

-  Fixes ``pytest-invenio`` version ``1.2.2`` breaking tests, because it
   downgrades ``pytest-flask`` and ``Flask``. ``pytest-invenio`` is
   pinned to ``1.2.1``.
-  Fixes unit tests for item barcode automatically generated (prefixed
   with “f-”), to ensure that the time stamp of the generated barcode
   equals the ``sysdate`` time stamp.
-  Tests the ES simple query with provided search use case in different
   languages.
-  Installs, configures and adds first Cypress test for end to end (e2e) tests.

``rero-ils-ui``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Rewrites ``MainTitleService`` as a pipe to ease its use in
   components.
-  Fixes the test component name to be coherent with component name.
-  Rewrites tests to limit imports and declarations.
-  Fixes private attribute names that were missing the leading
   underscore.

Instance
~~~~~~~~

-  Moves from ``pipenv`` to ``poetry`` to improve dependency
   management. Uses ``python-dotenv`` to load ``.env`` and ``.flaskenv``
   files. This allowed to upgrade ``werkzeug`` which resulted in an
   issue fixed with the item view and the tests.
-  Removes a bad hack with ``appnope`` package for Mac OSX.

> -  Removes ``setuptools`` manifest which is not used.

Reviewer: is not used anymore?

-  Configures ``celery`` to load ``.env`` and ``.flaskenv`` files.
-  Adds ``invenio-logging`` Sentry extensions.
-  Removes ``pipenv`` environment variables from the ``setup`` script.
-  Fixes an error when interrupting the ``server`` script, resulting in
   processes still running, after the move from ``pipenv`` to
   ``poetry``.

> -  Sets the ``setup`` script to skip ebook harvesting by default.

Reviewer: This was already the case in the previous release.

Release notes
=============

v0.9.0
------

This release note includes the release note of ``rero-ils-ui`` version
``v0.2.0``.

User interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Improves the document detailed views (public and professional) with
   tabs: a “get” tab with the holdings and information on items, a

>    “description” tab with extended document metadata and, in the public

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   “description” tab with extended document metadata and, in the professional
```

>    view, an “online” tab when the resource is available through an hyper
>    link. On top of these tabs, there the main metadata of the document

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   view, an “online” tab when the resource is available through a hyperlink.
   On top of these tabs are displayed the main metadata of the document
```

   with the cover thumbnail.

Public interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Removes the item detailed public view which is useless, all relevant

>    information being on the document detailed public view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   information being on the document detailed view.
```

Professional interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> -  Updates the library custom editor to normalizes button accordingly to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  Updates the library custom editor to normalize buttons accordingly to
```

   the
   `charter <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/wiki/Usability-charter#buttons>`__.
   Also, when a day is set to closed, the opening hours are hidden in
   addition to be disabled.

Search
~~~~~~

-  Moves from the ES query string, which is powerful but should not be
   used for public search input, to ES simple query, much simpler but

>    much more resilient with syntax error in the query. It also allowed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   much more resilient with syntax errors in the query. It also allowed
```

   to set the default boolean operator to AND, which is what the

>    librarian and patrons are expecting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   librarians and patrons are expecting.
```

>    The API request are still done through the ES query string, as
>    complex query are needed to populate the user interface. A new HTTP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The API requests are still done through the ES query string, as
   complex queries are needed to populate the user interface. A new HTTP
```

   query optional parameter is added to identify the simple query:
   ``&simple=1``.
-  Sets the same AND boolean operator instead of a OR when selecting

>    multiple items in the same facets, thus reducing the scope of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   multiple items in the same facet, thus reducing the scope of the
```

   filter instead of expanding it.
-  Improves the ES mapping to enhance the search quality.
-  Adds a RERO ILS custom analyzer as a default analyzer.
-  Improves languages analyzer with ``unicode`` capabilities (oe, œ, ue,

>    ü, etc.). Uses a new ES docker image with ``icu`` plugins for this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ü, etc.). Uses a new ES docker image with ``icu`` plugins for these
```

   functionalities.

Circulation
~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Checks that there is only one pickup location by library.
-  Processes notification asynchronously, which is more scalable and
   reliable.

> -  Implements *paging request to closed stack* functionality, needed and

Author: No it's not, I'm amending it.

   developed by
   `UCLouvain <https://uclouvain.be/en/libraries/about.html>`__. It
   allows to restrict, for a specific location, the available pickup
   locations, or even to disable the request option for the whole
   location. It also allows to set a manager for these paging requests,

>    who is notified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   who receives printable e-mail notifications for each request.
```

   -  Updates the location detailed view with new “paging request”
      fields.
   -  Updates the location brief view to identify the “closed stacks”.

>       Adds tool tip message when the location can’t be deleted. Updates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Adds tooltip message when the location can’t be deleted. Updates
```

      button style according to the
      `charter <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/wiki/Usability-charter#buttons>`__.
   -  Adapts the “request item” selector to display only the available
      pickup locations.

-  Normalizes the action buttons of the user interface accordingly to
   the
   `charter <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/wiki/Usability-charter#buttons>`__.

Data
~~~~

-  Updates the item JSON schema in order to remove requirement on the
   call number. The item barcode is still required, but can be left
   empty by the librarian and then is automatically set by the system.
   This changes are needed to a next to come functionality, *receive an
   issue*, in which the librarian should be able to add an item without
   having to attribute a barcode and a call number to it.
-  Creates a separate table for each resource in the database. Import

>    and export of a resource is easier and access to records faster in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   and export of a resource are easier and access to records faster in
```

   big datasets.
-  Updates JSON schema to draft 7.

> -  Adds methods to ensure PID’s are actually unique.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Adds methods to ensure PIDs are unique.
```

-  Improves JSON schema and ES mapping of the patron transaction event.
-  Implements physical description in the new data model: extent,

>    duration, format, illustrations colors and physical details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   duration, format, illustrations, colors and physical details.
```

> -  Fixes creation, merging and deletion of holdings record for ebooks,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Fixes creation, merging and deletion of holdings records for ebooks,
```

   during harvesting.

> -  Links document to person authority record through IdRef, GND or RERO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Links documents to person authority records through IdRef, GND or RERO
```

   ID instead of a MEF record ID. The MEF clustered record is still used

>    to provide multilingual capabilities, but the source authority files

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   to provide multilingual capabilities, but the source authority
```

>    ID’s are much more stable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   IDs are much more stable.
```

> -  Updates the document editor to propose person authority from the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Updates the document editor to propose person authorities from
```

>    IdRef and GND authority record from the MEF server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   IdRef and GND records in the MEF server.
```

User management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Adds manual blocking of patrons by the librarian. Blocked patrons

>    can’t check out document, place request on document, and are informed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   can’t check out documents or place requests on documents, and are informed
```

>    can’t check out document, place request on document, and are informed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   can’t check out or place requests on documents, and are informed
```

   of the blocking in their profile. Librarian are also informed of the
   blocking when displaying the patron profile or when trying to place
   circulation transactions that are not possible due to the blocking.

API
~~~

-  Splits the item class into two classes, the ``api.record:ItemRecord``
   to manage the item record, the ``api.circulation:ItemCirculation`` to
   manage item circulation transactions.
-  Adds a new API URL to check, when creating or updating a patron, if
   the email does not already exist. A validation message is displayed
   in the editor.
-  Exposes PO based translations in JSON through a new API HTTP endpoint
   to the angular application (``rero-ils-ui``), to avoid translating
   the same strings in both projects. On the ``rero-ils-ui`` side, the
   translation mechanism is updated to consume the exposed JSON file
   translations.
-  Adds ``create`` to the permission API and removes permissions from
   the ``SearchSerializer``.

> -  Improves the way ``rero-ils-ui`` is getting permissions, through the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Improves the way ``rero-ils-ui`` gets permissions, through the
```

   permission API instead of a search query.

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Adds an informative ``README.rst``, addressed to the general public
   and developers, explaining the context of the project, what it does

>    and will do, where to find documentation on how to develop, install

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and is going to do, where to find documentation on how to develop, install
```

   or contribute to RERO ILS.

> -  Updates ``rero-ils-ui`` issue template in order to remind user at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Updates the ``rero-ils-ui`` issue template in order to remind users
```

>    creation to privilege issue creation in the ``rero-ils`` GitHub

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   to privilege issue creation in the ``rero-ils`` GitHub
```

   repository.

Tests
~~~~~

-  Fixes another dependency issue, this time with ``jsonresolver``.
-  Fixes ``pytest-invenio`` version ``1.2.2`` breaking tests, because it
   downgrades ``pytest-flask`` and ``Flask``. ``pytest-invenio`` is
   pinned to ``1.2.1``.
-  Fixes unit tests for item barcode automatically generated (prefixed
   with “f-”), to ensure that the time stamp of the generated barcode
   equals the ``sysdate`` time stamp.
-  Tests the ES simple query with provided search use case in different
   languages.

``rero-ils-ui``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> -  Rewrites ``MainTitleService`` as a pipe to ease its use into

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Rewrites ``MainTitleService`` as a pipe to ease its use in
```

   components.

> -  Fixes test component name to be coherent with component name.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Fixes the test component name to be coherent with the component name.
```

-  Rewrites tests to limit imports and declarations.
-  Fixes private attribute names that were missing the leading
   underscore.

Instance
~~~~~~~~

> -  Moves from ``pipenv`` to ``poetry`` to improve dependencies

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Moves from ``pipenv`` to ``poetry`` to improve dependency
```

   management. Uses ``python-dotenv`` to load ``.env`` and ``.flaskenv``
   files. This allowed to upgrade ``werkzeug`` which resulted in an
   issue fixed with the item view and the tests.
-  Removes a bad hack with ``appnope`` package for Mac OSX.
-  Removes ``setuptools`` manifest which is not used.
-  Configures ``celery`` to load ``.env`` and ``.flaskenv`` files.
-  Adds ``invenio-logging`` Sentry extensions.
-  Removes ``pipenv`` environment variables from the ``setup`` script.
-  Fixes an error when interrupting the ``server`` script, resulting in
   processes still running, after the move from ``pipenv`` to
   ``poetry``.

> -  Sets the ``setup`` script to skip ebooks harvesting by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Sets the ``setup`` script to skip ebook harvesting by default.
```

> -  Improves the handling of scheduled task with the use of REDIS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  Improves the handling of scheduled tasks with the use of REDIS
```

   scheduler backend, allowing to enable, disable, update, create
   scheduled tasks dynamically.

Issues
~~~~~~

-  `#91 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/91>`__: The facets
   behaviour was not as expected. It associated two items with an OR

>    instead of a AND operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   instead of an AND operator.
```

>    instead of a AND operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   instead of an AND operator.
```

-  `#675 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/675>`__: A question
   was raised on how to improve the library custom editor, specifically

>    the opening hour section. It was decided to hide the opening hours
>    when of the closed days.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   the opening hours section. It was decided to hide the opening hours
   for closed days.
```

>    when of the closed days.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   for closed days.
```

-  `#755 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/755>`__: The search
   failed with a query containing brackets ``[]``.
-  `#819 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/819>`__: The
   population of items in editor selectors was very slow.
-  `#850 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/850>`__: Creation of
   two records with the same PID is possible.
-  `#884 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/884>`__: Removes the
   public item detailed view as it is not useful anymore.

> -  `#890 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/890>`__: Action

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  `#890 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/890>`__: Actions
```

   realised in circulation should be in past participle, not in the
   infinitive form.

> -  `#932 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/932>`__: Librarian

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  `#932 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/932>`__: Librarians
```

>    were able to edit item types and patron types, but this actions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   were able to edit item types and patron types, but these actions
```

>    were able to edit item types and patron types, but this actions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   were able to edit item types and patron types, but these actions
```

   should be reserved to system librarians.
-  `#934 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/934>`__: Searching for
   patrons in a large data set should rely on a good ranking, in order
   to get an exact match on the top of the results page.
-  `#1000 <https://github.com/rero/rero-ils/issues/1000>`__: A test on

>    documents API was not raising exceptions, resulting in a failed test.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   the document API was not raising exceptions, resulting in a failed test.
```
